# XI. Concerning a wonderful work of God, who calls things which are not as though they were things which are, and who can act when and how he wills; and concerning a certain miracle.

It has been handed down to memory that a certain man of Cleveland, called Richard Rowntree, left his wife great with child and went with many others to the tomb of Saint James. And one  night they passed the night in a wood near to the King's highway.  Wherefore one of the party kept watch for a part of the night  against night-fears, and the others slept in safety. 

And it happened that in that part of the night, in which the man we speak of was  guardian and night watchman, he heard a great sound of people passing along the King’s highway. And some rode sitting on horses  and sheep and oxen, and some on other animals; and all the animals were those that had been given to the church when they died .[^1] 

And at last he saw what seemed a small child wriggling along on the ground wrapped in a stocking.[^2] And he conjured him and asked  him who he was, and why he thus wriggled along. And he made  answer, “You ought not to conjure me for you were my father and  I was your abortive son, buried without baptism and without  name.” 

And when he heard this the pilgrim took off his shirt and  put it on his small child and gave him a name in the name of the  Holy Trinity, and he took with him the old stocking in witness to the  matter. And the child when he had thus received a name jumped  with joy and henceforth walked erect upon his feet though previously  he had wriggled. And when the pilgrimage was over he gave a  banquet to his neighbours and asked his wife for his hose. She  showed him one stocking but could not find the other. Then the  husband showed her the stocking in which the child was wrapped and she was astonished. And as the midwives confessed the truth concerning the death and burial of the boy in the stocking a divorce took place between the husband and the wife in as much as he was  the godfather of the abortive child. But I believe that this divorce was highly displeasing to God.[^3][^4]

<center>* * *</center>

[^1]: There are multitudinous examples of the nightly processions of the dead, but I do not know another case in which they ride on their own “mortuaries” (the beasts offered to the church or claimed by it at their decease); it is a curious reminiscence of the pagan fashion of providing means of transport for the dead by burying beasts with them. — M.R.J.
    
[^2]: See notes upon this story ~~at the end of the article~~ after the text. (Emendation -- N.B.Z.)
    
[^3]: Evidently the wife was not accessory to the indecent burial of the child, and the sympathy of the writer is with her. The divorce does seem superfluous, since though sponsors were not allowed to marry, here is but one sponsor; but I know not the canon law. — M.R.J.
    
[^4]: I cannot conceive what the grounds of the divorce were, unless it could be argued that the father, by standing godfather to his own child after marriage, entered into a relationship which was irregular. Parents could not be sponsors for their children; and if the story is true it may have been held that this irregular  act dissolved the marriage,’ and that, in taking upon him the sponsorship, he renounced his rights as a husband. On the face of it this was the view taken;  the incident was so remarkable that it  must have been hard to cite precedent. - A.H.T

This page is difficult to read, blurred,  and the writing in places gone. — M R J.

(*For my (much-embellished) retelling of this story, see [The Baby in the Boot](https://multoghost.wordpress.com/2016/03/02/the-baby-in-the-boot/) at my blog Multo(Ghost).* -- N.B.Z.)

## Notes upon No. XI.

1. The Latin word translated ‘stocking' in the text of this story is caliga. As this word is still occasionally rendered, when found in medieval documents, in its classical sense of 'boot' it may be noted here that in post-classical times it was specially applied to cloth hose, the habitual form of medieval stocking. Among the garments enumerated in the Rule of St. Benedict, cap. lv, as sufficient for the monk are _indumenta pedum : pedules et caligas_, i.e. sandals and hose. As Dom Delatte remarks in his Commentary upon the Rule (trans. McCann, p. 348), the actual meaning of this passage perplexed the commentators of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries; and he himself appears inclined to transpose the meaning of the two words. Ducange, s.v. _Caliga_, gives abundant references, but no positive definition. A passage, however, in the _Constitutiones Lanfranci_ (ap. Wilkins, _Concilia_, i, 359), dealing with the laying out of bodies of dead monks, is quite explicit: _calcietur caligis supradicto panno factis, usque ad genua attingentibus, et nocturnalibus_. Here the _nocturnales_ are the monk’s shoes for night wear, while the _caligae_ are cloth hose reaching to the knees. Cf. in this context the direction in _Liber Eveshamensis_ (Henry Bradshaw Soc., vi, col. 124): _Camerarius debet habere preparatos nocturnales et staminiam quam antea non habebat indutam et caligas_. These texts are noted by Dr. J. T. Fowler in the glossary appended to Durham Account Rolls (Surtees Soc., ciii, p. 899), where he defines _Caligae_ as ‘socks, or stockings of some kind, sometimes perhaps soled.’ That their material was cloth is clearly shown by several references in the rolls, e.g. ibid., c, p. 518: _in ...... panno empt. pro caligis inde faciend._; p. 553: _in garniamento T. fatui cum 14 ulnis pro caligis tondendis_ ; and especially p. 536: _in 15 uln. panni diversi coloris emp. in nundinis Dunelm. pro caligis inde jaciendis_. Dr. G. G. Goulton notes (Social Life in England, p. 78) the common misapprehension of the meaning of _caliga_, and refers to passages in Thorold Rogers’ History of Agriculture and Prices in England in confirmation of the true meaning. Further, Promptorium Parvulorum (Camden Soc., i, 248, with a long note, and E.E.T.S., col. 227) has ‘Hose. Caliga’: see also _Catholicon Anglicum_ (E.E.T.S., p. 189): ‘Hose. _Caliga, caligula,_’ followed by the verse _Sunt ocrie, calige quos tebia portat amictus_. Here _ocreae_ are high boots worn over the cloth hose; cf. Prompt. Paw. ut sup., i, 45: ‘Bote for a mannys legge. Bota. Ocrea’; and col. 44: ‘Boote for the legg. Bota ocrea.’ Such boots were made of leather; see _Durham Account Rolls_ ut sup., ciii, p. 587: _1 pare botarum de Cordwan pro d’no priore_. With regard to the wearing of boots (_ocreae_) by canons regular see the indult (_Cal. Papal Letters_, vi, 158), by which the canons of Worksop were permitted to wear shoes (sotularia) instead of boots; see also _Visitations in the Diocese of Lincoln_ (Lincoln Record Soc.), i, 32, note, and ii, 165, 168, for their obligation to wear boots. Dr. M. R. James quotes Blackman's account of Henry VI’s dress: he wore _caligas, ocreas, calceos omnino pulli coloris_, which hose, boots, and shoes appear to be distinguished. Although, as Dr. James remarks, the writer of these stories cannot be supposed to have drawn very line distinctions between _ocrea_ and _caliga_, yet the distinction is well supported, and it is more reasonable to suppose that the child’s body was wrapped in a cloth stocking than stuffed into a high leather boot. — A.H.T.
    
2. The occurrence of the name Rowntree in this story has been communicated to Mr. Arthur Rowntree, of York, in view of a possible connection between his family and the neighbourhood of the story. He answers that his pedigree can be traced back to a certain William Rowntree, of Riseborough, near Pickering, born in 1728, and that the family may have come from Stokesley, where there are some six or seven hundred Rowntree names in the parish register. Rowntree wills occur in the Probate Registry at York in 1543, 1553, and 1558; but there appears to be no record of any association with this particular district.
