# XII. Concerning the sister of old Adam of Lond and how she was seized after her death according to the account given by old men. 

It must be understood that this woman was buried in the churchyard of Ampleforth, and shortly after her death she was seized by William Trower the elder, and being conjured she confessed that she wandered in his road at night on account of certain charters which she had given wrongfully to Adam her brother. This was because a quarrel had arisen between her husband and herself, and therefore she had given the papers to her brother to the injury of her husband 
and her own children. So that after her death her brother expelled her husband from his house, namely from a toft and croft in Ampleforth with their appurtenances and from an oxgang of land in Heslarton and its appurtenances, and all this by violence. She begged therefore this William to suggest to her brother that he should restore these charters to her husband and her children and give back to them their land, for that otherwise she could by no means rest in peace until the day of judgment. 

So William, according to her commands, made this suggestion to Adam, but he refused to restore the charters, saying, “ I don't believe what you say." And he answered, " My words were true in everything; wherefore if God will you shall hear your sister talking to you of this matter ere long." 

And on another night he seized her again and carried her to the chamber of Adam and she spoke with him. And her hardened brother said, as some report, “If you walk for ever I won’t give back the charters. Then she groaned and answered, “May God judge between you and me. Know then that until your death I shall have no rest; wherefore after your death you will walk in my place." 

It is said moreover that her right hand hung down, and that it was very black. And she was asked why this was, and she answered that it was because often in her disputes she had held it out and sworn falsely. At length she was conjured to go to another place on account of the night-fear and terror which she caused to the folk of that village. I ask pardon if by chance I have offended in writing what is not true. It is said, however, that Adam de Lond, the younger, made partial satisfaction to the true heir after the death of the elder Adam. 