# X. How a penitent thief, after confession, vanished from the eyes of the demon. 

It happened formerly in Exeter[^1] that a ditcher, a hard worker and a great eater, lived in the cellar of a great house which had many cellars with connected walls but only one living room. The ditcher when he was hungry, used often to climb up into the living room,and cut off slices from the meat that was there hung up, and cook them and eat them, even if it were Lent. And the lord of the house, seeing that his meat was cut, examined his servants concerning the matter. And as they all denied and cleared themselves by oath, he threatened that he would go to a certain sorcerous necromancer and make enquiry through him into this wonderful event. 

When the ditcher heard this he was much afraid and went to the friars and confessed his crime and received the sacrament of absolution. But the lord of the house went as he had threatened to the necromancer, who anointed the nail of a small boy, and by incantation asked him what he saw. And the boy answered, “I see a serving man with clipped hair.” The necromancer said, "Conjure him, therefore, to appear to you in the fairest form that he can and so he did. And the boy said, “Behold I see a very beautiful horse. And then he saw a man in a form like that of the ditcher,climbing up the ladder and carving the meat with the horse following him And the clerksaid, "What are the man and the horse doing now And the child said, “Look, he is cooking and eating the meat. And when he was asked again, “What is he doing now?” the little boy answered, “They are going both of them to the church of the friars, but the horse is waiting outside, and the man is going in, and he kneels and speaks with a friar who places his hand onhis head.” Then the clerk asked of the boy, “What are they doing now?” and he answered, “They have both vanished from my eyes and I can see them no longer, and I have no idea where they are.” 


[^1]: The word is Exon. Is it possible that some local name is concealed under it? If it really refers to Exeter it is the only story that does not refer to the district.